# 12 Rules for Life An Antidote to Chaos - Jordan B. Peterson

I have read this book at least 4 times up to this point. 12 rules or more
precisely guidelines have been presented by Jordan trying to help someone live a
better life. I say they are better conceptualized as guidelines, because Jordan at
no point suggests that they must be followed or that judgement will befall one if
they are ignored. Although the second point can be assumed from the existence of
the text itself.
The book in itself never mentions it, but if one watches Dr. Peterson long enough
can learn that his goal is to construct his framework about the world and align
the rules in such a way that they will act as a bulwark against the malevolence
and the suffering that is inherent to existence itself.

The 12 rules are:

   1. Stand up straight with your shoulders back
   2. Treat yourself like someone you are responsible for helping
   3. Make friends with people who want the best for you
   4. Compare yourself to who you were yesterday, not to who someone else is today
   5. Do not let your children do anything that makes you dislike them
   6. Set your house in perfect order before your criticize the world
   7. Pursue what is meaningful not what is expedient
   8. Tell the truth - or, at least, don't lie CHECKED
   9. Assume that the person you are listening to might know something you don't CHECKED
   10. Be precise in your speech CHECKED
   11. Do not bother children when they are skateboarding CHECKED
   12. Pet a cat when you encounter one on the street CHECKED

## Stand up straight with your shoulders back

Rule 1 is about the importance of dominance hierarchies. It stipulates that the
systems governing even our postural flexion, the serotonergic system, is so old
that we share it with lobsters. This means that these systems in ourselves are
older than are capability to recognize trees. For this reason one has to have
their place in the dominance hierarchy somewhere. They have to have an occupation,
otherwise they are lost and misguided.

## Treat yourself like someone you are responsible for helping

Rule 2 makes a remark about the dichotomy between people acting towards other
people, or pets for that matter, and themselves. People don't like themselves very
much and we also know ourselves deeply and intimately. We know all our flaws, all
our shortcomings and vile thoughts. So people will find hard to extend the same 
kindness towards themselves that they would for someone else. The else is simple,
but we are, man we are bad, I deserve my suffering, I have earned it. Jordan
points out that organ transplant recipients have their bodies reject the organs
they have been waiting for, sometimes for years, because they fail to administer
their anti-rejection medication properly. However, when it comes to their dogs,
cats or children, people would generally follow the prescriptions to the letter
and administer the medicine fully.

## Make friends with people who want the best for you

Rule 3 is about the company one keeps. Do you have friends to whom you can share
bad news with? Do you have friends to whom you can share good news with? Do your
friends support you or are they trying to pull you back down, when you manifest a
behavior that is pointing upwards? Let's say you want to quit smoking, but your
friends are smokers. At a social gathering they would ask: "Don't you want to
smoke one? Just relax and enjoy yourself.". By doing this they would slowly
pressure you into the action you wish to avoid.
In other words they will put you down or pull you down. When you want to reach
higher, they grab your leg and say no no no no, you come back here and stay with
us, I don't want to feel bad about myself seeing you achieve greatness.
This is a harsh rule as it also says that those who do not act in a way that is
supporting of your proper goals have to be discarded. We should stipulate proper,
which is another question in itself, requiring a tremendous amount of self
reflection and wisdom to even have a clue about. On the other hand at least we can
say that one can stop doing things they know to be wrong and that will be a good
first step.

## Compare yourself to who you were yesterday, not to who someone else is today

Rule 4 is perhaps the most important rule of all, especially in this day and age
of the interconnectedness we have. It is strikingly easy to choose any discipline,
go online and find someone who is so extremely good at it, so much so that the
hopes of ever achieving such platitudes are miniscule. Then one compares
themselves with the unachievable and decide not to even try, or try timidly while
constantly putting themselves down in comparison to the ideal.
Instead, we are much better off if we humble ourselves and accept our wretchedness
with all it's shortcomings and follies. Then try to improve it day by day, step by
step. It might take a while, but it will get somewhere and the miniscule
improvements of each day will very soon start producing compound effects.
The rule doesn't express it explicitly, but we need peers to admire. People we can
strive to be. So the problem isn't exactly with comparing yourself to someone
else, but the way in which you do it. Admiring someone of great worth is not a
tool to put yourself down, but more the realization of a value, represented in the
world, that resonates with ones being, thus spurring the individual for imitation.
It is a tool to learn about who we are, but it requires humility and a genuine
care for oneself.

## Do not let your children do anything that makes you dislike them

Rule 5 explains how important is to discipline your children. Or in other words to
do something hard and painful, so that the one you love can become more. It points
out that one can be a good person, but no matter how good one might be a monster
lives inside as well. Keep that monster long enough in the dark while feeding it
scraps of resentment, stress and hardships then an action on the child's part at
an importunate time would wake it from it's slumber. Or more generally speaking.
Either the inner monster is embraced and integrated, and we start acting in ways
that keep it slumbering peacefully or there will be a price to be paid when it
bursts out. Especially if we hurt our children in the process, the only parts of
us that will live on even after we are gone.

## Set your house in perfect order before your criticize the world

Rule 6 is about humility or at least that seems to be the underlining narrative.
One cannot wish to fix the injustices of the world if they cannot fix their own
fallacies and shortcomings first. It is exceedingly easy to find the enemy
outside, but it is all the more difficult to face the foes dwelling inside. The
process of self reflection is a long and arduous process. It is not just about
accepting our shortcomings, but facing them down one by one, hugging them close
and letting them go. Dr. Peterson often says that parts of you have to die so the
rest can go on and flourish. Letting those parts die is painful, especially
because they were created and strengthened, even in their misguided/misshaped
form, to protect us against the pain and suffering which are inevitable parts of
life.

## Pursue what is meaningful not what is expedient

Rule 7 is a hard one to follow in todays world. Doing expedient things one after
the other to sooth the inner pain cannot be easier. Buy something, drink
something, buy something else, buy the new version of the thing you have and
haven't realized it yet you need the new one. Go watch a movie, then have a fancy
dinner, watch Netflix all day, because cleaning the house doesn't sound like fun.
Then, at the end of the day feel bad, that nothing of value has been achieved and
you know your life is going nowhere you wish it to go. That is what doing
expedient things does. Shame and self loathing and ultimately the lack of meaning
is the price. Meaningful things are hard, they take effort and sacrifice. In
return however, when the night comes and there is nothing to distract you while
you are watching the sealing laying on your back in the darkness, the questions
"What am I doing with my life? Who am I? Why do I feel so empty?" won't haunt you.
The things you do would not allow for these questions to even be formulated as the
issues that would give rise to them aren't there any more.

## Tell the truth - or, at least, don't lie

Rule 8 is a nasty one. Telling the truth or not lying is no simple task. Not at
all. The difficulty lies in what was already said in Rule 6. One must be able to
be truthful with themselves first and foremost, they have to learn to watch and
understand the opposing voices inside their minds and act on them when necessary.
Not to shun them and push them down. A person who cannot stand up for themselves
will shrink in the eyes of others and in theirs. A shrunken person, now learned in
their incapability is doomed to repeatedly undermine their lives as long as they
keep lying to themselves about what they need and deserve in life. Telling the
truth is not just done for the sake of working with reality and not trying to bend
it to our will, but it is for seeing the truth, to see the things as they are,
because then, and only then can one do something about it.
"What saves is the willingness to learn from what you don't know." White lies,
lies or any untruthful deed does nothing of value, but facilitates the avoidance
of responsibly doing what we know needs to be done.

## Assume that the person you are listening to might know something you don't

Rule 9 or the power of silence. Silence of the prematurely judgmental mind, the
one that wants to solve the problem now, the one that is afraid to be changed and
challenged by the information that may have been said. Truly listening to someone
is hard and even dangerous.
Many quotations are made from Carl Rogers which need to be repeated here as well:
"The great majority of us cannot listen; we find ourselves compelled to evaluate,
because listening is too dangerous. The first requirement is courage, and we do
not always have it."
Acting in an argument:
"Stop the discussion for a moment, and institute this rule: 'Each person can speak
up for himself only after he has first restated the ideas and feelings of the
previous speaker accurately, and to that speaker's satisfaction.'"
Premature problem solving:
"Sound simple, doesn't it? But if you try it you will discover it is one of the
most difficult things you have ever tried to do. If you really understand a person
in this way, if you are willing to enter his private world and see the way life
appears to him, you run the risk of being changed yourself, You might see it his
way, you might find yourself influenced in your attitudes or personality. This
risk of being changed is one of the most frightening prospects of most of us can
face."
Listening is a form of thinking on the parts of the speaker and on the parts of
the listener. The one speaking formulates and orders ideas into coherent speech,
while the one listening is trying to understand the words spoken. Asking
clarifying questions helps both parties clear up the ideas, cutting through the
confusions that there may lurk.

## Be precise in your speech

Rule 10 describes the necessity and usefulness of precise speech. It really sounds
like a twist on Rule 8 or a more specialized form of it. This rule points out that
speaking is a vital part of the human experience. It shapes how we see things, our
perception of the world. People don't see objects, but they see tools. They don't
see a cliff, but a falling off place. They don't see a cup, they see a container
you can drink from. Later in our perception will the tool turn into the object.
Why does this matter? How is this connected to speech? Our reality appears only in
such a complexity to us as it needs to. When we drive a car, we don't think about
how the engine is combusting a precise amount of carefully balanced mixture of
fuel and air. Nor do we have to. A car isn't a car with it's full complexity but
the tool that is taking us from place A to B if we do the rehearsed set of actions
we call driving. Reducing the worlds complexity is necessary for us to function.
Otherwise reality would be too overwhelming. But there are times when such
inaccuracies cannot be allowed. When it comes to problems that are bothering us,
may those be marital, with work or even our character we cannot allow ourselves
the luxury of not speaking and when doing so not being precise with it. Speech
calls forward things from the depths of our minds, the shapeless nagging ideas and
feelings, get manifested into existence. There when they enter the light of day
they can be handled with care. Otherwise they grow in the darkness getting
stronger and stronger, corrupting our relationships and our character. The ideas
must be formulated as precisely as possible so that only the issue at hand is
fixed, not everything at once.
Suppose you have an character flaw you want to fix about yourself. Saying your a
bad person gives you nothing to work with. You cannot become another person, but
you can specify why you feel like a bad person. I am a bad person, because I don't
work as much as I want to. Hmm, now you can do something. You can perhaps make a
plan, ask some more question and specify some more. In the end you can narrow it
down to a tiny thing that you can act upon. This way in a sense you remove your
rot with a scalpel and only the minimal amount of you has to die. That is better,
than combusting into flames at once. We are not phoenixes. Some of us may get up,
but most won't if that happens.

## Do not bother children when they are skateboarding

Rule 11 is about the masculinity. How it is vital not only form men but for women
as well. Women who are too agreeable, get pushed around. They get used and abused
by their partners and by the world. Men who are only boys cannot achieve things,
cannot become desirable for women. Both parties get resentful and lost. Smart,
beautiful, talented, hard working women are looking for men who are higher in
income, education, self-confidence, intelligence and dominance. In short they are
looking for a partner that can provide something that they cannot already do
themselves. They need this as the cost of child bearing is very high for them.
Without a supporting partner they can rely on, the cost might be just too much.
Aggression is necessary. What is toxic is uncontrolled aggression. Weak men turn
resentful as the world does not give them anything for granted, then their
aggression bursts into uncontrollable violence and we read the horrific news about
school shootings.

## Pet a cat when you encounter one on the street

Rule 12 is the appreciation of the little things. Of allowing oneself to have
still open eyes that are ready to embrace the tiny sparks of hope, light, joy even
when their worlds are falling apart. When their loved ones are slowly dying of
cancer or suffer in other cruel ways. Life is suffering and sometimes it can
become just too much, but if one allows themselves not to be consumed by
resentment, not to be blinded by self pity they can stay vigilant and appreciate
the little things in life that can, even for a moment, elevate their existence out
of the darkness and into the light again. Suffering is inevitable. What choice we
do poses is about how we approach the challenges we have to face. How we carry
ourselves despite the catastrophes, despite the pain. Each day can have something
that we can appreciate, but we have to step past the resentment and humble
ourselves to accept the little joys that were given us that day. It might not be
much, especially when life is really hard, but it might just be enough to carry us
trough that day, hour or even minute. We cannot ever know how little more we had
to endure before things turned around. So take the little you were given and
appreciate it.
