
# In the realm of hungry ghosts - Gábor Máté

The book focuses on addiction and how it occurs. May that be addiction to hard
drugs like cocaine, methamphetamines or commonly accepted ones like alcohol,
caffeine and recently marihuana. Or and this was a shock to me or even a
revelation perhaps, people can get addicted to patterns of behaviors as well, like
working, sports, sex. The author himself admits being addicted to buying classical
music by the truckload, whether he already owned 3-4 separate versions of the same
symphonies or not. How he was addicted to working nonstop.
Even more importantly it is shown in meticulous detail, that addiction is affected
by the development of the person from the moment of conception. That everything
affecting the mother during pregnancy will affect the child, everything during the
first few years of the child's maturation will have a lasting impact on the
resulting behavioral patterns. The developing brain will compensate/adapt for the
pressures and impacts that the environment is exerting on it.
Many examples are given by the author what an early event what kind of impact can
have on a person. Two of these have stayed with me as I think we can all relate to
these if we allow ourselves to observe them, for it is almost without question
that we have experienced one of them at least throughout our lives, even as adults.
A baby is crying in its crib for whatever reason. If it isn't attended to for
around 3 days, when it cries for support, it will stop doing so altogether. Being
so profoundly vulnerable, and begging for help while being completely incapable of
doing anything about the situation hurts so deeply that the only way the psyche
sees to protect itself is shut down the feelings altogether. To push them down, to
compartmentalize them and box them away into the dark recesses of the mind. The
justification being, if it hurts too much to feel, so much so that is is crushing
you, it is better not feel at all. I don't think any of us have to think too hard
or too long about a situation when we have felt completely powerless and the best
we have managed to do was to ignore the issue, the feelings altogether.
The second example Gábor has raised was about his workaholism. As a baby being
born in 1944 to Jewish parents in Hungary 2 months before Nazi occupation his life
had a rough start. To save his life her mother smuggled him out of the ghetto
while he was only 12 months old. The separation from his mother, the stresses that
he had endured as a small child affected him deeply. His sense of self worth
suffered greatly. He had an extremely hard time receiving love on an emotional
level. Not that he didn't receive any, his foster parents loved and took care of
him, he was incapable of receiving it. However the need for being loved is in all
of us and it is not something one can live without. To compensate for the void of
not feeling loved he made himself indispensable by becoming a very hard working
doctor. If they need me, if they rely on me to help them, then I must be valuable
even though I don't experience the feeling inside. Since the internal void cannot
be filled by external events, but the external events sooth the internal pain, the
cycle of addiction continues and when the external source diminishes the internal
pain bubbles up. In his words: "Like any addict, I used my addictions to help
regulate my moods, my internal experience. On weekends when the beeper fell silent
I felt empty and irritable-the addict in withdrawal.". How many of us have
experienced something similar? When we work, when we do something we like or
sometimes we don't even like we are more or less stable and fine, but the moment
the external stimuli is gone and we are left alone with ourselves and the demons
we try so desperately to suppress come back with a vengeance.
Addiction is not just a result of a psychological process going haywire. It is the
result of actual physical change in our brains. A change that is mostly affected
by the environment. Genes do play a part, but not a significant one. "Not only is
there no addiction gene, there couldn't be one.", there are just to few genes to
code for everything. Professor Robert Sapolsky also demonstrates in his [Human
Behavioral Biology](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNnIGh9g6fA
list=PL848F2368C90DDC3D) course that genes can have wildly different effects based
on the environment.
These observations are rather profound. To be honest they even look bleak. There
seems to be no escape. If your brain has physically changed, what is there for you
to do?
The author although doesn't propose a solution, he demonstrates that force,
violence and retribution is not a way for helping. The war on drugs has failed on
many accounts and there is no evidence for it's efficacy. On the other hand
programs where patients were allowed to inject free drugs in a safe environment
have been tremendously successful. The rates of infections, overdoses have
plummeted. And by relieving the addict of the burden of collecting enough money to
fuel his addiction, they have excess resources to try and put themselves back
together. Others didn't became addicts who weren't previously ones. It wasn't a
gateway to the lifestyle. No healthy person wants to be shunned and rejected by
society so they can have a few minutes of joy, if their lives are in order.
What about other addictions? Workaholism or sports? They are insidious in a sense
that society is actively rewarding these behaviors as well. What can we do then?
Something analogous to the compassionate approach towards hard drug users should
be how one approaches themselves. One has to be allowed again to feel, to accept
having the needs long suppressed so the being can come back together into the
unity it was meant to be in.
Somehow whenever I think of these issues, whenever emotions come up that I try to
suppress I remember the quote: "Peace cannot be kept by force; it can only be
achieved by understanding." - Albert Einstein
Not sure to what he has formulated this sentence, but is seems true when applied
in this sense as well.
